# Papers to read 
1/ [Codon language embeddings provide strong signals for use in protein engineering](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-024-00791-0)

**Abstract**: Protein representations from deep language models have yielded state-of-the-art performance across many tasks in computational protein engineering. In recent years, progress has primarily focused on parameter count, with recent models’ capacities surpassing the size of the very datasets they were trained on. Here we propose an alternative direction. We show that large language models trained on codons, instead of amino acid sequences, provide high-quality representations that outperform comparable state-of-the-art models across a variety of tasks. In some tasks, such as species recognition, prediction of protein and transcript abundance or melting point estimation, we show that a language model trained on codons outperforms every other published protein language model, including some that contain over 50 times more parameters. These results indicate that, in addition to commonly studied scale and model complexity, the information content of biological data provides an orthogonal direction to improve the power of machine learning in biology.

2/ [PNAbind: Structure-based prediction of protein-nucleic acid binding using graph neural networks](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.02.27.582387v1)

**Abstract**: The recognition and binding of nucleic acids (NAs) by proteins depends upon complementary chemical, electrostatic and geometric properties of the protein-NA binding interface. Structural models of protein-NA complexes provide insights into these properties but are scarce relative to models of unbound proteins. We present a deep learning approach for predicting protein-NA binding given the apo structure of a protein (PNAbind). Our method utilizes graph neural networks to encode spatial distributions of physicochemical and geometric properties of the protein molecular surface that are predictive of NA binding. Using global physicochemical encodings, our models predict the overall binding function of a protein and can discriminate between specificity for DNA or RNA binding. We show that such predictions made on protein structures modeled with AlphaFold2 can be used to gain mechanistic understanding of chemical and structural features that determine NA recognition. Using local encodings, our models predict the location of NA binding sites at the level of individual binding residues. Binding site predictions were validated against benchmark datasets, achieving AUROC scores in the range of 0.92-0.95. We applied our models to the HIV-1 restriction factor APOBEC3G and show that our predictions are consistent with experimental RNA binding data.

3/ [De novo design of protein interactions with learned surface fingerprints](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-05993-x)

**Abstract**: Physical interactions between proteins are essential for most biological processes governing life1. However, the molecular determinants of such interactions have been challenging to understand, even as genomic, proteomic and structural data increase. This knowledge gap has been a major obstacle for the comprehensive understanding of cellular protein–protein interaction networks and for the de novo design of protein binders that are crucial for synthetic biology and translational applications. Here we use a geometric deep-learning framework operating on protein surfaces that generates fingerprints to describe geometric and chemical features that are critical to drive protein–protein interactions. We hypothesized that these fingerprints capture the key aspects of molecular recognition that represent a new paradigm in the computational design of novel protein interactions. As a proof of principle, we computationally designed several de novo protein binders to engage four protein targets: SARS-CoV-2 spike, PD-1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4. Several designs were experimentally optimized, whereas others were generated purely in silico, reaching nanomolar affinity with structural and mutational characterization showing highly accurate predictions. Overall, our surface-centric approach captures the physical and chemical determinants of molecular recognition, enabling an approach for the de novo design of protein interactions and, more broadly, of artificial proteins with function.

4/ [Differentiable biology: using deep learning for biophysics-based and data-driven modeling of molecular mechanisms](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-021-01283-4)

**Abstract**: Deep learning using neural networks relies on a class of machine-learnable models constructed using ‘differentiable programs’. These programs can combine mathematical equations specific to a particular domain of natural science with general-purpose, machine-learnable components trained on experimental data. Such programs are having a growing impact on molecular and cellular biology. In this Perspective, we describe an emerging ‘differentiable biology’ in which phenomena ranging from the small and specific (for example, one experimental assay) to the broad and complex (for example, protein folding) can be modeled effectively and efficiently, often by exploiting knowledge about basic natural phenomena to overcome the limitations of sparse, incomplete and noisy data. By distilling differentiable biology into a small set of conceptual primitives and illustrative vignettes, we show how it can help to address long-standing challenges in integrating multimodal data from diverse experiments across biological scales. This promises to benefit fields as diverse as biophysics and functional genomics.
